# RPV SUSY samples

This folder has all the necessary scripts to generate RPV SUSY samples. It is proven to work on `CMSSW_14_0_21_patch4`.

### The model

In R-Parity violating SUSY, the lightest SUSY particle (LSP) is allowed to decay into visible SM particles, controlled by a (small) coupling. In principle, using the Minimal Flavor Violation (MFV) scheme, the LSP can be either neutral or charged, and can decay into any family of the SM -- see details in the paper: https://journals.aps.org/prd/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevD.85.095009

This folder provides the cmsDriver workflow and CRAB scripts to generate samples based on a GEN fragment, available in `GEN/fragment_TEMPLATE.py`, which has the pythia8 parameters, including the decay table. By default, we set the LSP to be charged (stop) and to decay into d quarks. This can be changed simply by editing the aforementioned table before running the workflow.

### How to generate samples

The workflow is divided in 5 basic steps (including the setup as step 0). In each step, we generate a configuration file and send it to CRAB using a simple bash script. 

#### step 0: Setting up

After cloning this repo into the `src` folder of a new `CMSSW_14_0_21_patch4` workspace and move to this branch with

```
source /cvmfs/cms.cern.ch/cmsset_default.sh
cmsrel CMSSW_14_0_21_patch4
cd CMSSW_14_0_21_patch4/src
git clone https://github.com/brunolopesbr2/Run3ScoutingAnalysisTools.git
cd Run3ScoutingAnalysisTools
git checkout -b Run3_JetHT_Summer24 origin/Run3_JetHT_Summer24
```

the first step is to move the fragment template and the generation script, which are under `gen_fragments`, to the path `Configuration/GenProduction/python` (create the folder) inside the CMSSW `src` directory. Then, edit the decay table inside `fragment_TEMPLATE.py` to the desired process, by changing the PDG code of the LSP and its decay product, and the corresponding processParameters inside the generator block -- as mentioned, the default is stop -> dbar dbar.

After choosing the process to be generated, the next step is to choose the parameters (mass and lifetime) of the LSP. This can be done by simply editing the `mStops` and `ctaus` at the beginning `generate_fragments.sh`. Then just run it with

```
bash generate_fragments.sh
```

and the script will generate all needed fragments, one for each parameter set. With the fragments ready, go back to the main folder and compile with `scram b -j8; scram b python`, so that CMSSW will understand that there are new GEN fragments available.

#### step 1: GEN-SIM (pythia8 + GEANT4)

With the fragments all set, the first step is to create the CMSSW configuration files with `cmsDriver.py`. This can be done by running the first command of the `cmsDriver_workflow.txt`. Alternatively, there's the script `generateStep1.sh` that runs the command in a bash loop to the desired parameters. To use the script, just edit the `mStops` and `ctaus` to the desired values (consistent to what was done in the setup), double-check the cmsDriver parameters (all settings are there, including the Global Tag) and run with

```
bash generateStep1.sh
```

With the configuration files in place, `cmsRun` one of the generated files to test if everything is alright (don't forget to run `cmsenv`). If it runs fine, the next step is to prepare the CRAB jobs. The file used for that is `crab_step1_TEMPLATE.py`. First, have a look at this file, edit the tag (which controls the job and output dataset name) as desired, and choose the total number of events by changing `config.Data.splitting`. By default, it runs 30 events per job, otherwise it can crash due to memory -- CRAB allows 3000 MB for a single-core job. It can be tuned by allowing more cores, so CRAB gives 2500 MB per core, which is done on the next steps.

With the CRAB script in place, go to `step1_crab.sh`, edit the `mStops` and `ctaus` and check if everything is alright. Before sending the jobs, don't forget to source the CRAB configurations (once per shell) with:

```
source /cvmfs/cms.cern.ch/common/crab-setup.sh
```

then run with `bash step1_crab.sh`. Instructions to monitor the jobs will be printed on the screen.

#### step 2: HLT

Step 2 takes care of the detector electronics, pileup (by mixing with minimum bias events) and the trigger itself. The configuration file is generated using the second command in `cmsDriver_workflow.txt`. A premade configuration can be found at `DIGIPremix-HLT_cfg.py`. The only difference between what is generated by cmsDriver and the premade configuration is that the number of threads is set to 4 in order to optimise the CRAB jobs, which can be easily edited.

A critical detail here is the pileup premix dataset. Both the premade config file and the workflow use `/Neutrino_E-10_gun/RunIIISummer24PrePremix-Premixlib2024_140X_mcRun3_2024_realistic_v26-v1/PREMIX` for that, which is the only option on disk for Summer24 at the time of writing of this README. It can change in the future, and the config file needs to be regenerated with the new dataset, which can be found in DAS.

As the premix dataset has order of 500k files, the config file becomes large and the CRAB jobs need more memory. Also, be sure to have a few gigabytes of disk available before sending the jobs. If everything is ready, have a look at `crab_step2_TEMPLATE.py`, edit the tag as desired and note it now requires 4 threads and 10000 MB of memory. 

As previously, the script to run is `step2_crab.sh`. This time, however, the input datasets (output from the previous step) are required. As different config files were used in the first step, each output dataset has a different random tag in the name. To handle that, the script uses a bash associative array. Check the outputs of the first step using the instructions provided by CRAB and edit the dataset names accordingly, and also don't forget to change the `mStops`, `ctaus` and the dataset indices. When everything is in place, just send the jobs with `bash step2_crab.sh`.

#### step 3: Offline RECO + AOD

This step takes care of the offline reconstruction and saves the output in the AOD format. It can be done with the third command of `cmsDriver_workflow.txt` or using the premade `RECO_cfg.py`, which is set to 4 threads as done in step 2. With the config file in hand, edit the tag and job parameters in `crab_step3_TEMPLATE.py` and go to the running script `step3_crab.sh`.

In the bash script, note that now the dataset name is constructed within the loop. This is possible because the random tag is the same for all step 2 output datasets, as they use the same config file. Edit the `mStops` and `ctaus`, change the dataset name to the output of the previous step and run with `bash step3_crab.sh`.

#### step 4: MiniAOD

This step constructs the datasets in the miniAOD format. It can be done with the fourth command of `cmsDriver_workflow.txt` or using the premade `MiniAOD_cfg.py`, which also uses 4 threads as previously. The way to run it is precisely the same as step 3: edit the tag and job parameters in `crab_step4_TEMPLATE.py`, the parameters and input dataset in `step4_crab.sh` and run with `bash step4_crab.sh`.